[Dart 3] Patterns (#4810)
dart-lang/site-www: src/language/pattern-types.md

---
title: Pattern types
description: Pattern type reference in Dart.
---

> 

Reviewer: Maybe a one-sentence intro here that links back to the other patterns page, like:

```
Here are all the kinds of [patterns][] that can be used.
```

## Cast

> `foo as String`

Author: So, I did that originally but a full code block just has _so much_ extra margin/padding space, I hated the way it looked, and I felt like it distracted from the actual functioning example blocks within each section.

This:
<img width="830" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/111139605/236066695-ef8ba162-06ea-49a8-9362-9e42f6329824.png">

vs. this:
<img width="830" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/111139605/236066804-038cc36d-8fbf-4d22-8436-b217021dd5a4.png">

I think the latter looks so much better! Idk, is it really that bad?

> `foo as String`

Reviewer 2: I do agree in the short term the inline code looks better.

While not a priority to land in this PR, we can always introduce a custom block or style for this type of heading later on :)

> `foo as String`

Author: Ok, resolving for now

Cast patterns let you insert a [type cast][] as a pattern is

> [destructuring][destructure] values:

Reviewer: I think the original prose is deliberate, but maybe it would read better as:

> A cast pattern lets you insert a [type cast][] in the middle of destructuring before passing the value to another subpattern.

?

> [destructuring][destructure] values:

Author: Oh, yes the original meant "Cast patterns let you insert a type cast _while_ a pattern is destructuring some values", but I'll change it to Bob's suggestion

```dart
(num, Object) record = (1, "s");
var (i as int, s as String) = record;
```

Cast patterns will [throw][] if the value doesn't have the stated type.
Like the [null-assert pattern](#null-assert), this lets you forcibly assert the
expected type of some destructured value.

## Constant	

`123, null, 'string', math.pi, SomeClass.constant, const Thing(1, 2), const (1 + 2)`

Constant patterns allow simple literals and references to named constants to be
used directly as patterns. They match when the value is equal to the constant.

Some valid constant expressions may not be valid constant patterns. In that case,
to distinguish a constant expression from a constant pattern, prefix the expression
with `const` and wrap it in parenthesis so it is unambiguosly an expression and

> not a constant pattern:

Reviewer: How about:

"Number (`123`, `45.56`), boolean (`true`), and string (`'hi'`) literals, and named constants (`someConstant`, `math.pi`, `double.infinity`) are directly usable as constant patterns. Constant constructors (`const Point(0, 0)`) and constant collection literals (`const []`, `const {1, 2}`) can also be used directly as patterns. More complex constant expressions must be parenthesized and prefixed with `const` (`const (1 + 2)`)."

(Or maybe pull those examples out into code blocks.)

```dart
// List or map pattern:
case [a, b]: ...

// List or map literal:
case const [a, b]: ...
```

> ## Identifier	

Reviewer: This section is great. It does a very good job of explaining one of the more confusing parts of the feature.

`foo, _`

Identifier patterns may behave like a [constant pattern](#constant) or like a
[variable pattern](#variable), depending on the context where it appears:

- [Declaration][] context: declares a new variable with identifier name:
  `var (a, b) = (1, 2);`
- [Assignment][] context: assigns to existing variable with identifier name:
  `(a, b) = (3, 4);`
- [Matching][] context: treated as a named constant pattern (unless its name is `_`):
  ```dart
  const c = 1;
  switch (2) {
    case c: print('match $c');
    default: print('no match');    // Prints "no match".
   }
  ``` 

> - [Wildcard](#wildcard) identifier in any context: matches any value and discards it:

Reviewer 3: I'd be inclined to pull this out to a separate ## Wildcard entry myself.  They're not really identifier patterns per se, and certainly users won't think of them that way.

Reviewer 3: Ah, I see you did so below.  :)

  `case [_, var y, _]: print('The middle element is $y');`

## List

`[subpattern1, subpattern2]`

List patterns match values that implement [`List`][], and then recursively match

> its subpatterns against the list's elements to destructure them by position.

Reviewer: "its" -> "their", or (probably better) make the whole sentence singular. "A list pattern matches... matches its subpatterns... ."

> List patterns require that the pattern match the entire list, but you can use

Reviewer 3: Worth mentioning that in a declaration or assignment context, if the number of elements don't match an exception is thrown?

Reviewer 3: > that any pattern in that context is irrefutable and that an exception is thrown when patterns don't match in any irrefutable context, for any type of pattern, if the value doesn't match match.

Sort of?  In an irrefutable context, mostly the value can't fail to match.  That is, mostly if you see `var <pattern> = expression`, you'll get a static error if the static type of expression doesn't guarantee that the value will match pattern.  There are two bug exceptions: if the type of `expression` is `dynamic`, in which case the match might fail, and if `<pattern>` is a list pattern, in which case it can fail if the length isn't correct.  So there's something fundamentally different between the pattern `(a, b)` and `[a, b]`.  In a refutable context, they either match or don't, but in an irrefutable context, the former will always match, but the latter may throw an exception if the destructured value doesn't have exactly two elements.

[rest elements](#rest-element) as a place holder.

### Rest element

List patterns can contain _one_ rest element (`...`) which allows matching lists
of arbitrary lengths.

```dart
var [a, b, ..., c, d] = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7];
print('$a $b $c $d'); // Prints "1 2 6 7".
```

Rest elements can also have subpatterns that collects elements that don't match

> the other subpatterns in the list, into a new list:

Reviewer: Given that you can only have a single rest element in a pattern, I think this would read better singular.

```dart
var [a, b, ...rest, c, d] = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7];
print('$a $b $rest $c $d'); // Prints "1 2 [3, 4, 5] 6 7".
```

## Logical-and	

`subpattern1 && subpattern2`

A pair of patterns separated by `&&` matches only if both subpatterns match. If the

> left branch does not match, the right branch is not evaluated. 

Reviewer 3: Maybe mention that the subpatterns may bind variables, but that they must be disjoint?

Reviewer 3: Yep, that's great.

## Logical-or

`subpattern1 || subpattern2`

A pair of patterns separated by `||` matches if either of the branches match.
If the left branch matches, the right branch is not evaluated. 

> Logical-or patterns can be nested inside a destructuring pattern. 

Reviewer: Actually any pattern can be nested inside a destructuring pattern. You can go wild: `case Foo([a]! && {1: b}? || Bar() as Baz)`. So I'd probably not call this out here since it suggests, at least, that `&&` *can't* be nested.

Author: I can add the line "Any [kind of pattern][] can be nested inside a destructuring pattern" to the Destructuring section on the main page.

```dart
switch (list) {
  // Matches a two-element list whose first element is 'a' or 'b':
  case ['a' || 'b', var c]:
}
```

{% comment %}
[TODO: move the below content to the switch page, doesn't belong here]
{% endcomment %}

Logical-or patterns are useful for having multiple cases share a body in switch
expressions or statements.

```dart
var isPrimary = switch (color) {
  Color.red || Color.yellow || Color.blue => true,
  _ => false
};
```

Switch statements can have multiple cases share a body without using logical-or
patterns, but they are still uniquely useful for allowing multiple cases to share
a guard: 

```dart
switch (shape) {
  case Square(size: var s) || Circle(size: var s) when s > 0:
    print('Non-empty symmetric shape');
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: Maybe mention that or patterns may bind variables, but both sub-patterns must bind the same variables (as in your example)?

Author: Added:

> Subpatterns in a logical-or pattern can bind variables, but the two branches must
> define the same set of variables, because only one branch will be evaluated when
> the pattern matches.

## Map

`{"key": subpattern1, someConst: subpattern2}`

Map patterns match values that implement [`Map`][], and then recursively 
match its subpatterns against the map’s keys to destructure them.

Map patterns don't require the pattern to match the entire map. If a map has

> extra keys that te pattern doesn't destructure, it can still match.

Reviewer 3: te -> the

> extra keys that te pattern doesn't destructure, it can still match.

Reviewer: "te" -> "the".

"can still match" is kind of vague. Maybe: "A map pattern ignores any keys that the map contains that aren't matched by the pattern."

## Null-assert	

`subpattern!`

Null-assert patterns permit non-null values to flow through, but [throw][] if the
matched value is null. 

```dart
List<String?> row = // ...

// If the first column is 'user', we expect to have a name after it.
switch (row) {
  case ['user', var name!]:
    // name is a non-nullable string here.
}
```

## Null-check	

`subpattern?`

Null-check patterns match if the value is not null, and then match the inner
pattern against that same value.

```dart
String? maybeString = // ...
switch (maybeString) {
  case var s?:
    // s has type non-nullable String here.
}

> ```

Reviewer 4: It might be worth pointing out that you use the constant pattern `null` to match when the value _is_ null. Someone asked me about this recently.

## Object

`SomeClass(x: subpattern1, y: subpattern2)`

Object patterns checks the matched value against a given named type to destructure
data using the getters the object's class already defines. They are [refuted][]
if the value doesn't have the same type.

The getter name can be omitted and inferred from the [variable pattern](#variable)
or [identifier pattern](#identifier) in the field subpattern:

```dart

> var Point(:var x, :var y) = Point(1, 2);

Reviewer 3: No `var` on x and y in a declaration or context (only in a matching context).

Author: Thanks, I was getting confused by that myself

```

Object patterns don't require the pattern to match the entire object.
If an object has extra fields that the pattern doesn't destructure, it can still match.

## Parenthesized

`(subpattern)`

Like parenthesized expressions, parentheses in a pattern let you control pattern
precedence and insert a lower precedence pattern where a higher precedence one is
expected.

## Record

`(subpattern1, subpattern2)`

`(x: subpattern1, y: subpattern2)`

Record patterns match a [record][] object and destructure its fields.
If the value isn't a record with the same [shape][] as the pattern, the match
fails. Otherwise, the field subpatterns are matched against the corresponding
fields in the record.

```dart
// Variable:
var (untyped: untyped, typed: int typed) = // ...
var (:untyped, :int typed) = // ...

switch (obj) {
  case (untyped: var untyped, typed: int typed): // ...
  case (:var untyped, :int typed): // ...

> }

Reviewer 4: I would move the typed / untyped stuff to the variable patterns section, since it's not specific to how record patterns work.

// Null-check and null-assert:
switch (obj) {
  case (checked: var checked?, asserted: var asserted!): // ...
  case (:var checked?, :var asserted!): // ...
}

// Cast:
var (field: field as int) = // ...

> var (:field as int) = // ...

Reviewer 4: Aren't null-check, null-assert, and cast patterns already covered elsewhere?

Author: Yeah I just copied this block straight from the spec without putting much thought into it, but it looks like it's showing records + some other subpattern examples. I'll try to sort the extra ones out to where they belong, though I do think a few outer+inner pattern examples are alright

the equality or relational operators: `==`, `!=`, `<`, `>`, `<=`, and `>=`.

The pattern matches when calling the appropriate operator on the matched value
with the constant as an argument returns `true`.

Relational patterns are useful for matching on numeric ranges, especially when
combined with the [logical-and pattern](#logical-and):

```dart
String asciiCharType(int char) {
  const space = 32;
  const zero = 48;
  const nine = 57;

  return switch (char) {
    < space => 'control',
    == space => 'space',
    > space && < zero => 'punctuation',
    >= zero && <= nine => 'digit'
    // Etc...
  }
}
```

## Variable

`var bar, String str, final int _`

Variable patterns bind new variables to values that have been matched or destructured. 
They usually occur as part of a [destructuring pattern][destructure] in order to
capture a destructured value.

The variables are in scope in a region of code that is only reachable when the
pattern has matched.

```dart
switch ((1, 2)) {
  case (var a, var b): // ...
  // var a and var b are variable patterns that bind to 1 and 2, respectively.
  // They are in scope in the case body.
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: Maybe mention that a typed variable pattern only matches if the matched value has the declared type (and otherwise the match fails)?

Author: Nice, I actually had that as part of the definition originally but took it out because I wasn't sure if it was useful or not. Thanks for confirming!

    print('Non-empty symmetric shape');
}
```

{% endcomment %}

## Map

`{"key": subpattern1, someConst: subpattern2}`

Map patterns match values that implement [`Map`][], and then recursively 
match its subpatterns against the map’s keys to destructure them.

Map patterns don't require the pattern to match the entire map. A map pattern
ignores any keys that the map contains that aren't matched by the pattern.

## Null-assert	

`subpattern!`

Null-assert patterns match first if the object is not null, then on the value.
They permit non-null values to flow through, but [throw][] if the matched value is null. 

```dart
List<String?> row = // ...

// If the first column is 'user', we expect to have a name after it.
switch (row) {
  case ['user', var name!]: // ...
    // 'name' is a non-nullable string here.
}
```

Use the null-assert pattern to eliminate `null` values from variable declaration
patterns.

## Null-check	

`subpattern?`

Null-check patterns match first if the value is not null, and then match the inner
pattern against that same value.

```dart
String? maybeString = // ...
switch (maybeString) {
  case var s?: ...
    // 's' has type non-nullable String here.
}
```

> Use a null-check pattern while matching if you need to ensure `null` values

Reviewer 5: I don't understand this sentence.  Doesn't a null-check pattern do exactly that: silently treat a null value as a match failure?

Should this be "Use a null-assert pattern ..."?  Maybe the sentence above, about null-assert patterns, should be the one about null-check patterns, and they are accidentally switched.

Reviewer 5: I do think the other sentence is about null checks - it is "silently eliminating null (matches) from a pattern", without throwing. I don't see how assets could ever be silent.

Author: Got it. The null check pattern is about purposefully treating null values as match failures, and null assert is about _not_ treating them silently. I kept the line in both sections, emphasizing the difference

`subpattern!`

Null-assert patterns match first if the object is not null, then on the value.
They permit non-null values to flow through, but [throw][] if the matched value
is null. 

> Use a null-assert pattern while matching if you need to ensure `null` values
> are not silently treated as match failures:

Reviewer 6: **issue:** Condition, then instruction per [GSG](https://developers.google.com/style/sentence-structure).

```suggestion
To ensure `null` values don't get treated as match failures,
use a null-assert pattern while matching:
```

```dart
List<String?> row = // ...

switch (row) {
  case ['user', var name!]: // ...
    // 'name' is a non-nullable string here.
}
```

> Use the null-assert pattern to eliminate `null` values from variable declaration

Reviewer 6: **issue:** Condition, then instruction per [GSG](https://developers.google.com/style/sentence-structure).
```suggestion
To eliminate `null` values from variable declaration, use the null-assert pattern
```

Null-check patterns match first if the value is not null, and then match the inner
pattern against that same value.

> Use the null-check pattern to silently treat `null` values as match failures
> without throwing.

Reviewer 6: **issue:** Condition, then instruction per [GSG](https://developers.google.com/style/sentence-structure).
```suggestion
To treat `null` values as match failures
without throwing errors, use the null-check pattern.
```

**note:** The `silently treat` and `without throwing` are redundant. I removed one.

```dart
String? maybeString = // ... maybeString is nullable with the base type String.
switch (maybeString) {
  case var s?: ...
    // 's' has type non-nullable String here.
}
```

The null-check pattern provides a terse way to bind a variable whose type is the

> non-nullable base type of the nullable value being matched.

Author: Shortened and moved to the top of the section
